What Is a Socket?

	A socket is a communication mechanism that allows client/server systems to be developed either locally,
on a single machine, or across networks. Linux functions such as printing, connecting to databases, and
serving web pages as well as network utilities such as rlogin for remote login and ftp for file transfer
usually use sockets to communicate.

	Sockets are created and used differently from pipes because they make a clear distinction between client
and server. The socket mechanism can implement multiple clients attached to a single server.

Socket Connections
	You can think of socket connections as telephone calls into a busy building. A call comes into an organization
and is answered by a receptionist who puts the call through to the correct department (the server process)
and from there to the right person (the server socket). Each incoming call (client) is routed to an
appropriate end point and the intervening operators are free to deal with further calls. Before you look at
the way socket connections are established in Linux systems, you need to understand how they operate
for socket applications that maintain a connection.

	First, a server application creates a socket, which like a file descriptor is a resource assigned to the server
process and that process alone. The server creates it using the system call socket, and it can’t be shared
with other processes.

	Next, the server process gives the socket a name. Local sockets are given a filename in the Linux file system,
often to be found in /tmp or /usr/tmp. For network sockets, the filename will be a service identifier
(port number/access point) relevant to the particular network to which the clients can connect. This
identifier allows Linux to route incoming connections specifying a particular port number to the correct server process.
For example, a web server typically creates a socket on port 80, an identifier reserved for the purpose. Web browsers know
to use port 80 for their HTTP connections to web sites the user wants to read. A socket is named using the system call bind.
The server process then waits for a client to connect to the named socket. The system call, listen, creates a queue for
incoming connections. The server can accept them using the system call accept. When the server calls accept, a new socket
is created that is distinct from the named socket. This new socket is used solely for communication with this particular
client. The named socket remains for further connections from other clients. If the server is written appropriately,
it can take advantage of multiple connections. A web server will do this so that it can serve pages to many clients at once.
For a simple server, further clients wait on the listen queue until the server is ready again.

	The client side of a socket-based system is more straightforward. The client creates an unnamed socket
by calling socket. It then calls connect to establish a connection with the server by using the server’s named socket as an address.
Once established, sockets can be used like low-level file descriptors, providing two-way data communications.

Client example program is in example_1.c.

	This program fails when you run it because you haven’t yet created the server-side named socket. (The
exact error message may differ from system to system.)

A simple load server program is in example_2.c

How It Works

	The server program in this example can serve only one client at a time. It just reads a character from the
client, increments it, and writes it back. In more sophisticated systems, where the server has to perform
more work on the client’s behalf, this wouldn’t be acceptable, because other clients would be unable to
connect until the server had finished. You’ll see a couple of ways to allow multiple connections later.

	When you run the server program, it creates a socket and waits for connections. If you start it in the
background so that it runs independently, you can then start clients in the foreground.

$ ./server1 &
server waiting

	As it waits for connections, the server prints a message. In the preceding example, the server waits for a
file system socket and you can see it with the normal ls command. Remember that it’s good practice to remove a socket
when you’ve finished with it, even if the program terminates abnormally via a signal. This keeps the file system from
getting cluttered with unused files.

$ ls -lF server_socket
srwxr-xr-x 1 neil users 0 2007-06-23 11:41 server_socket=

	The device type is “socket,” shown by the s at the front of the permissions and the = at the end of the
name. The socket has been created just as an ordinary file would be, with permissions modified by the current umask.
If you use the ps command, you can see the server running in the background. It’s shown sleeping (STAT is S) and is
therefore not consuming CPU resources.

$ ps lx
F UID PID PPID PRI NI VSZ RSS WCHAN STAT TTY TIME COMMAND
0 1000 23385 10689 17 0 1424 312 361800 S pts/1 0:00 ./server1

	Now, when you run the client program, you are successful in connecting to the server. Because the
server socket exists, you can connect to it and communicate with the server.

$ ./client1
server waiting
char from server = B

	The output from the server and the client get mixed on the terminal, but you can see that the server has
received a character from the client, incremented it, and returned it. The server then continues and waits for the next
client. If you run several clients together, they will be served in sequence, although the output you see may be more mixed up.

$ ./client1 & ./client1 & ./client1 &
[2] 23412
[3] 23413
[4] 23414
server waiting
char from server = B
server waiting
char from server = B
server waiting
char from server = B
server waiting
[2] Done client1
[3]- Done client1
[4]+ Done client1
